# Revocation

V0.4 2026/06/13

## Overview

This whitepaper explores the tradespace around the dynamic revocation of verifiably issued digital entitlements in the context of SEDI (State Endorsed Digital Identity). Exploration of a tradespace is most productive when properly framed in terms of the associated system's desired goals and objectives. 

First, let's define some terms:

*SEDI (State Endorsed Digital Identity)*: In its simplest conception, SEDI is a digital identity system where the identifiers are sourced and controlled by the citizens (think citizen-sourced, state-endorsed digital identity).  The identifiers are cryptographically derived from cryptographic keypairs which keypairs along with cryptographic data structures and supporting infrastructure, enable the citizen to maintain and prove control over their identifiers indefinitely despite key rotations. This process follows an open-standard protocol and open infrastructure, enabling the true portability of each citizen's identifiers across infrastructure (vendor-neutral). Likewise, the State creates and maintains its own identifiers using the same open protocols and open infrastructure. The citizen may, at their choosing, bring one or more of their identifier to the State, whereupon the State performs identity assurance. The State then issues a cryptographically verifiable digital endorsement that binds the citizen as a natural person to their identifier(s). This endorsement is known as the core SEDI entitlement. It enables a citizen to prove their citizenship. This core SEDI entitlement can be cryptographically linked to other State-issued entitlements or verifiable credentials, such as a driver's license or proof of age.

*entitlement*: the act of giving, or the state of having, a title, right, or claim to something.

*credential*: evidence of authority, status, rights, entitlement to privileges, or the like, usually in written form.

*endorsement*: approval or sanction.

*issuance*: something that is sent out or put forth in any form.

*revocation*: the act of revoking; annulment, cancellation, nullification or withdrawal.

In the context of SEDI, issuances, be they entitlements, credentials, or endorsements, are digital in form and are cryptographically verifiable as valid (invalid). A dynamically revocable entitlement or credential can be canceled or nullified so that it is no longer verifiable as valid. In other words, it can be invalidated after issuance. We clarify dynamic revocation as revocation that can happen before the expiration date of any issuance, should it have one. Many issuances have a pre-set date and time whereupon the issuance is automatically invalidated, i.e., has expired. At the same time, dynamic revocation means that the issuance can be invalidated before its expiration date. For an issuance without expiration dates, dynamic revocation may be the only way to invalidate it. For the sake of brevity, unless otherwise specifically indicated, when we use the term "revocable" for issuances, we mean dynamically revocable. Likewise, unrevocable means not revocable at any time, even if it has an expiration date.

## Revocability Properties

From a system design perspective, we must consider the cases when revocability is essential for cryptographically verifiable digital issuances. The main determinant of revocability as a property is the lifetime of an issuance (time between issuance datetime and expiration datetime of amy). Dynamic revocation requires an overt act by the Issuer. Such overt acts take time to be approved and propagated. In some cases, approval of revocation may require due process through a legal or court proceeding. Therefore, issuances with short lifetimes relative to the time frame in which a dynamic revocation could be approved and promulgated may not benefit from revocability. In some cases, however, issuances with very short lifetimes are automatically reissued. This is often used to support entitlements that are long-lived themselves, but using a verification system whose verifiability is not so long-lived. In this case, an overt act of revocation is required to cause the interruption or cessation of the automatic reissuance. Thus, from a management perspective, if the underlying entitlement is long-lived, regardless of the case where a given issuance instance has a relatively short lifespan but is automatically reissued, an overt act of dynamic revocation is still required. To restate, the automatic reissuance of repeated instances provides an ersatz long-lived issuance that requires dynamic revocability nonetheless.

A further refinement of revocation is temporary revocation or suspension. A given entitlement might be dynamically suspended but not permanently revoked. We consider this a subset of dynamic revocation. One approach to implementing dynamic revocation is to have an issuance state. The issuance state could be binary (issued or revoked) or m-ary (issued, revoked, suspended, reactivated). When binary, then suspension requires first revocation and then reissuance. The policy for a suspension reissuance versus a non-suspension reissuance may dictate whether or not using m-ary states is better.

This time dependence then drives the system design tradespace. Exploring this tradespace requires answering the questions: Are issuances short-lived or long-lived? If short-lived, what is the mechanism for reissuance, and how does that mechanism scale when applied to the millions of issuances required for SEDI?

In general, current State operations for manual or "paper" issuances are that the issuances are, very long-lived relative to the time frame of overt acts of revocation. For example, state driver's licenses have a lifespan of 5 years. Upon a DUI arrest, the State Driver's License Division may immediately suspend the driver's privileges (i.e., suspend the entitlement to drive). A criminal conviction is not required for immediate suspension, but later conviction may result in full revocation with constraints on reissuance. Other examples include birth certificates, which last a lifetime, the right to vote lasts an adult's lifetime, and most licenses last at least a year and many multiple years. 

Therefore, with rare exception, if any, as a matter of policy, if not law, all state issuances MUST be revocable. To elaborate, revocability is required to satisfy administrative action or legal due process requirements. For example, an issuance may have been issued in error and needs to be corrected. An issuance may have been issued fraudulently and needs to be invalidated. In other cases, the attributes in an issuance may change before its expiration date. The entitlements in an issuance may be restricted or removed as a condition of policy enforcement by administrative action, such as a violation of terms of use. The entitlements may be restricted as the outcome of a court proceedings such as terms of sentencing, probation, or a civil settlement. Therefore, revocability is an essential property of almost, if not all, State issuances.

Thus, the relatively long lifetimes of state issuances combined with the legal and policy requirement of revocability mean that a SEDI implementation must support dynamic revocation.

There are two approaches to digitally verifiable issuances. One uses a proofing mechanism that is long-lived relative to the lifetime of the underlying entitlement. The other uses a proofing mechanism that is short-lived relative to the lifetime of the underlying entitlement. For long-lived entitlements, a short-lived proofing mechanism must be automatically reissued and refreshed in order to extend the verifiability to the lifetime of the associated entitlement. Whereas a long-lived proofing mechanism requires only one issuance whose verifiability lasts as long as the entitlement. In either case, revocability is required because the lifetime of the entitlement is typically much longer than the time frame required to perform an overt act to revoke or suspend the entitlement.

This then poses a tradeoff. Should the state use short-lived proofing mechanisms with automatic reissuance or long-lived proofing mechanisms that last at least as long as the associated entitlements?

Current paper issuances have manual proofing mechanisms that are long-lived relative to the entitlements so proven. These proving mechanisms are usually a combination of wet signatures or official stamps on issuances and auditable logs of issuances in registries governed by state and local authorities. The State has built infrastructure and policy around such long-lived manual proofing mechanisms. Therefore, using new short-lived digital proofing mechanisms may require the State to adopt a new operational model for digital issuances. Whereas using long-lived digital proofing mechanisms may be much more compatible with existing State policy and infrastructure. We will explore in more detail later the trade-offs between the two classes of digital proofing mechanisms.

The State, via the SEDI legislation and subsequent policy decisions, has indicated that the preferred digital proofing mechanism should be long-lived. This has been expressed as a requirement for perpetually verifiable issuances defined thusly:

*perpetually verifiable issuances*: The authenticity of an issuance by an entity can be cryptographically verified indefinitely, despite repeated compromise of the issuer's signing key infrastructure.

A perpetually verifiable issuance implies perpetual identity for the issuer and issuee. Thus a requirement for perpetually verifiable issuances induces a requirement for perpetual identity defined thusly:

*perpetual identity*: The cryptographic proof of control over the identifier can be maintained indefinitely despite repeated compromise of the signing key infrastructure used to prove control at any point in time.

Perpetual identity itself requires a long-lived proofing mechanism which can be leveraged for perpertually verifiable issuances which in turn can be leveraged for provable (verifiable) revocation of perpetually verifiable issuances. Thus a requirement for perpetually verifiable identity and perpetually verifiable issuances lay the ground work for revocation.

## Proofing Mechanism Tradespace

A hard problem of digital identity design, and more specifically verifiable issuance design, is solving the lifetime problem of cryptographic proofing mechanisms for the authenticity of those issuances. Cryptographic authenticity proofing mechanisms rely on cryptographic keys. Each key has a lifetime called a cryptoperiod. The factors that determine best practices for determining cryptoperiods are well established and provide the fundamental design constraint of any cryptographic system. Cryptoperiods are described in detail in NIST SP 800-57 part 1. 

Cryptographic Authentication mechanisms may broadly be classified as belonging to one of three classes: 
- shared secrets, 
- digital signatures based on asymmetric key pair generation algorithms, and 
- cryptographically verifiable data structures constructed with digital signatures. 

Shared secrets are the weakest of the three and usually require multiple weaker shared-secret factors working together to provide meaningful security. 

A single digital signature is typically much stronger. Elliptic curve-based digital signatures have proven resilient to pre-quantum brute force attack (computationally infeasible) but may be vulnerable to various side-channel attacks. They are also vulnerable to a post-quantum brute force attack on the key pair generation algorithm (not the signature itself). The strength of digital signatures may be multiplied using a multi-signature threshold scheme where signatures from multiple key pairs are used to provide multiple strong factors. The principal limitation of digital signatures is that over time, the likelihood of compromise increases with exposure of the signing infrastructure. The risk of compromise compounds with exposure over time. This risk is measured via the cryptoperiod of the asymmetric key pair. 

Fundamentally, an asymmetric key pair digital signing key pair is ephemeral. Its degree of ephemerality is a function of its exposure. The more exposure through use, the more likely that the signing infrastructure has been compromised. This risk can be mitigated by rotating the cryptographic key pairs and restarting the exposure clock. This ephemerality of cryptographic key pairs is the hard problem of cryptographic authentication using digital signatures as the proofing mechanism for authenticity of issuances. 

In general, best practice is that once a digital signing key pair is rotated, all issuances signed with that key pair are automatically invalidated. They are no longer verifiable. This imposes a lifespan on any bare attached signature as proof of issuance. Reasons to rotate key pairs may be highly dynamic and much shorter than the actuarial risk of compromise expressed via an average case crypto-period. For example, IT personnel turnover may dictate immediate rotation and invalidation of all signed issuances. Thus, practical key management associated with digital signatures as the proofing mechanism imposes a requirement of forced revocability independent of policy or legal requirements. This bears restating, when the authenticity proofing mechanism is a bare attached digital signature, all issuances must be revocable, and are forceably revoked whenever the keys are rotated. This key rotation is essential to protect the integrity of the signing infrastructure used to generate those digital signature proofs. 

This means that bare attached digital signatures are ephemeral (short-lived) proofing mechanisms. Hence, any issuances that use such a proofing mechanism are necessarily also ephemeral (short-lived) in nature. Consequently, long-lived entitlements (credentials, licenses, etc) based on issuance instances with ephemeral proofs require reissuance mechanisms to compensate for the mismatch between the lifespan of the proof and the entitlement. Typically, the burden of reissuance compounds with both the timescale and volume of reissuance. 

A useful metaphor is that digital signatures are like signing in dissappearing ink that fades over time due to exposure to air. After some period of time (the cryptoperiod), the ink disappears and the document must be re-signed (reissued) with fresh ink that has not yet been exposed to air.

The ephemerality of bare attached signatures as a proofing mechanism and the compounding effects of necessary reissuance have been the major drivers of conventional identity system design. To simplify the design when using bare attached signatures, verification has been centralized, with the issuer also serving as the signature verifier. And the party who is presented with an issuance, no longer verifies the signature directly but asks the issuer to verify on its behalf. This hides the reissuance problem from the recipients of presentation who instead become relying parties that phone home to the issuer/verifier. The key rotations of the issuer are thereby hidden from the relying parties. This is the driver behind the architecture of federated identity systems such as OAuth/OIDC, that consistes of identity providers (IdPs) and relying parties. It solves the hard problem of ephemerality of digital signatures from relying parties. The IdP is responsible for automated reissuance in a largely opaque manner. Relying parties must trust the operational integrity of the IdP. This centralized architecture is antithetical to the core SEDI principle of citizen-sourced identity. Indeed, the practical problems of automated reissuance that arise from using bare attached signatures as the proofing mechanism drives the system architecture to be more centralized. Whereas a perpetual verification mechanism fosters a fully decentralized architecture.

Therefore, if for no other reason, non-perpetually verifiable issuances (e.g., those using ephemeral proofing mechanisms) are problematic for SEDI.

Notwithstanding the former analysis, one can still build identity systems that use ephemeral authentication proofing mechanisms and are not centralized, i.e. where the verifier is not the issuer (no relying parties) but such systems must solve at scale the problem of automated reissuance in order to satisfy the legal and policy requirements of long-lived entitlements. 

For example, the current DNS/CA system uses a distributed model where X.509 certificates provide assertions of digital signing key pairs that a verifier whose is not the issuer may use to verify a signature. Issuing a new certificate with new keys for the same identifier (DNS name) is essentially a key rotation. Anythibng signed with the old keys must therefore be reissued (resigned with the new keys). The weaknesses of the administrative root of trust for DNS/CA have prompted the industry to advocate for shorter and shorter cryptoperiods, which then run afoul of the reissuance at scale problem for SEDI application. Recognize that in a SEDI application, millions of entitlements would need to be reissued on a regular basis. Such reissuance, even when highly automated, when decentralized would require continuing interaction between the issuer (State) and each and every citizen. Such continuing interaction could be impractical to the point of infeasibility. Moreover, forced revocation and reissuance of some or all SEDI issuances due to issuer signing infrastructure compromise could create a catastrophic interruption of service.

The reissuance-at-scale problem of decentralized ephemeral issuances is independent of the increased vulnerability to surveillance and tracking that automated continuing reissuance would likely induce.

The third type of proving mechanism, namely, cryptographically verifiable data structures constructed with digital signatures, has not seen wide adoption. Historically, because centralized federated identity systems with phone home verification could support rapid hidden key rotation and automated reissuance, there was little perceived benefit from the extra complexity of verifiable data structures as proof of issuance. However, for decentralized identity systems, as described above, reissuance becomes problematic. Consequently, a verifiable data structure as a proofing mechanism is uniquely well-suited to solving the ephemerality problem posed by bare-attached digital signatures for the decentralized digital identity required by SEDI.

In a verifiable data structure proof mechanism, the data structure is an append-only hash chained signed log of events. The events are chained using cryptographic hashes of prior events and signed with the current key state of the controller of the log. Each identifier has its own dedicated log. The log itself provides a cryptographically verifiable duplicity evident proof of the key state history for the identifier. To rotate keys, a new event committing to the new keys is appended to the log and signed with the new keys. To enable recovery from signing key compromise, each key state includes both the current signing keys and hashes of the one-time use rotation keys. Each rotation creates a new set of both signing and one-time use rotation keys. The rotation event is signed with the previously designated set of rotation keys. This is called key pre-rotation. Prerotation effectively forward-chains the rotation events. Such a cryptographically verifiable backward and forward chained and signed data structure can provide a duplicity evident proof of current key state that is fault tolerant to signing key compromise. The rotation keys are more secure because they are not exposed until their first use and are only used one time as rotation keys. Thus, they are minimally exposed, so they do not fall afoul of cryptoperiod risk due to continuing exposure. The only exposed information is their hash, which is already post-quantum safe. Thus, their crypto-period is not algorithmically limited either.

Most importantly for this discussion, issuances can be anchored to that data structure by which proof of authenticity is provided. This proof is perpetual (non-ephemeral) because such proofs outlive the cryptoperiod of the keys used to sign the anchoring event. Anchors may be bound in either rotation events or special interaction events. The later do not change key state but are merely chained and signed by the current key state.

Anchoring provides perpetually verifiable issuances that avoid the reissuance at scale problem of ephemeral proof mechanisms. The benefits of such an approach for citizen-sourced identity are profound. 

For example, for the issuer, with anchored issuances as the proof mechanism, signing at scale is not a constraint. Issuances themselves are not individually signed; a hash of the issuance is anchored in the log. This increases security because is minimizes the exposure of the underlying signing infrastructure. Only the log event is signed. Moreover, batch issuances can be batch anchored with a single signature on a single event that uses a Merkle tree root as the anchor. Consequently, less expensive HSMs may be employed. Likewise, for the verifier, signatures do not need to be verified at scale, only the anchor's presence in the Issuer's key event log. Each event in the Issuer's log need only be verified once and then cached by the verifier. The verifier then walks the cached log to find the anchor of any issuance to verify its authenticity.

The main concern with anchored issuances is potentially increased correlatability via those anchors. Bulk issuance, however, can solve that problem with much less complexity than the reissuance required to solve the signature ephemerality problem induced by bare attached signatures. Whereas reissuance requires multiplying at scale the number of interactions between both Issuers and Holders, and between Issuers and Verifiers. Often, the only cost-effective way to manage these continuing interactions is to use issuer-managed wallets with continuous online push or pull connections. Managed wallets lead to vendor lock-in and reduced portability, not to mention increased fragility of continuous connectivity. Managed wallets reduce effective citizen control over their digital identities. In contrast, bulk issuance uses a one-time bulk interaction between the Issuer and Holder. Contextualized presentation of members of the bulk issued set are distributed across interactions between holders and verifiers with no net increase in total interactions over single issuance.

### Proofing Applied to Revocation Registries

The same security strengths and weaknesses of shared secrets, bare attached signatures, and anchors in verifiable data structures as authenticity proof mechanisms for issuances apply equally when that issuance is a revocation registry for other issuances.  The bare attached signature attached to a bitstring status has an ephemeral time extent. That status must itself be revoked and replaced whenever the signing keys used to issue the bitstring status are rotated. This then requires a secure mechanism for publishing the key state used to verify any bare attached signature. This looks like a public key registry. The governance of such a registry must now be managed.

When that governance is shared, a new set of security problems arises. An attacker might have more success attacking the bitstring status signing infrastructure than the original verifiable credential issuer signing infrastructure.

While on the surface, something like a bitstring status seems simple, real-world security around that status is not. The same set of problems must be solved. These include solving the ephemerality problem caused by short-lived cryptographic keys.

Notwithstanding, the security complexity of bare attached signatures used to authenticate a bitstring status registry for revocation of issuances (entitlements, credentials, etc). A bitstring encodes the status of all issuances into a single data structure. This co-mingles the governance. This requires that any special cases be pre-determined before issuing the bitstring. Non-binary states require multiple bits in the bitstring. These have to be defined at the origin of any issuance that uses the bitstring. This imposes a rigidity on its management. 

The principal advantage of a bitstring status is its compactness. But compactness at the expense of security or governance complexity may not be a good trade.

ACDCs use independent registries, one per issuance. The registries are vacuous at creation; they are not bound to any specific issuance. The registries themselves are cryptographically verifiable, append-only, hashed-chained data structures that are perpetually verifiable because each entry (event) in a given registry is anchored in the KEL (key event log) of the Issuer of that registry. Each registry has a universally unique identifier, the SAID (hash) of its inception event. Therefore, an attacker must compromise the Issuer's key state to compromise a registry. All the protection that KERI provides around a KEL is therefore inherited by any registry anchored in that KEL. 

A Registrar is simply a service that serves up registries. It's a database server where each data entry is a perpetually verifiable, append-only log of ACDC state, which log includes, at a minimum, issuance and, when revocable, revocation. Because a registry maintains state, via events in a log that could be used for any stateful transaction involving the associated ACDC, the associated log is called a transaction event log (TEL). A registry maintains a TEL for an ACDC. A Registrar serves up a database of registries.

A registry is how an ACDC is issued. ACDCs are not signed; they are bound (anchored) to a registry, which in turn is bound (anchored) to a KEL. 

Because registry creation is vacuous and mutually independent, there is no co-mingling of state between registries. The actual transaction states that a given registry maintains for its associated ACDC can be determined at the time of the ACDC's issuance, not at the time of the registry's inception. The ACDC is bound at some event after the inception event. 

While each ACDC issuer initially controls its own registries for the ACDCs it issues, that control can be transferred via a transfer event in the registry.  This secure flexibility provides benefits for real-world SEDI applications that justify the increased storage requirements of a registry database over those of a more compact bitstring representation.


## Digital Identity System Goals

As mentioned in the overview, exploration of a tradespace is most productive when one first has a clear understanding of the ultimate goals of the system design.

### Citizen Control

One important, if not the most important, property of a digital identity system is control, as in, who controls the digital identity of a natural person. A digital identity is the digital representation of that natural person in the digital realm. This expression is often referred to as one's digital twin. As a free democratic society, each individual is endowed with inalienable rights that include life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. These rights are principally about control over one's own natural person in the physical embodied realm. When these rights were first expressed, there was no digital realm. Our legal system made no provision for equivalent civil rights over our digital twins that inhabit the digital realm. The result is that, by and large, our digital twin identities are controlled by others. Effectively, our digital twins are serfs beholden to digital rulers. As a result, we have little to no independence, liberty, or self-determination in the digital realm because we fundamentally do not control our digital twin identities. Therefore, the primary design goal of any citizen-based digital identity system should be to establish self-rule of that digital identity by the natural person belonging to that identity. The physical twin and only the physical twin should be in control of the digital twin not some entity or organization. This unifies digital and physical identity.

The Greek words *auto* *nomos* mean literally *self* *rule*. From these roots we get the English words, autonomous and autonomic, which mean independent, self-ruling, self-governing, or self-sovereign. In this light, a principal goal should be that the digital identity of each citizen should be autonomous with autonomic identifiers. 

Because the digital realm requires digital infrastructure, such as the public internet, a digital identity system also requires digital infrastructure. Independence of control or self-determination over the required supporting infrastructure can be simply expressed as user-controlled portability across infrastructure, where the user, in this case, is the citizen as controller of their own digital identity. To elaborate, a digital identity must be portable across supporting infrastructure, and the controller of that identity must be able to exercise that portability without the cooperation of the infrastructure provider. If provider cooperation is required, then the identity is not self-governing; the governance is shared between the individual and the infrastructure provider. Shared governance means the citizen is not truly autonomous with respect to that digital identity.

Citizen-user-controlled portability requires open infrastructure. Open infrastructure means open standards with open source reference implementations. It also means that the economics of infrastructure providers are designed to incentivize user-controlled portability across providers and foster decentralized cooperation and coopetition amongst providers. An open digital identity infrastructure can be viewed as a new type of public utility. An early example of partial portable digital identity infrastructure is telephone number portability across mobile and VOIP phone providers. This is not totally autonomous because the identifiers (phone numbers) must be rented. Moreover, if the control mechanism is easily compromised, then citizen control over portability is not strong. 

Therefore any discussion of citizen sourced digital identity must consider the strength of the security of citizen control over the supporting infrastructure. Autonomy requires security. Autonomy is reduced to the extent that some malicious party can capture control over the digital identity. In other words, if the digital identity is easily impersonated, spoofed, or compromised, then the citizen is not in control. Because phone numbers are easily spoofed which results in rampant impersonation fraud, phone number portability only partially solves the portability problem. 

To elaborate, a digital identity system that allows rampant impersonation fraud fails to satisfy the principal objective of citizen control because any impersonator is effectively taking control over that identity. Hence, user control requires the best practical security over the use of that identity. Impersonation fraud should be rare, at least as rare as impersonation fraud in the physical world. It bears restating, autonomy or self-rule is reduced by the degree to which that digital identity may be captured and used by another.

To summarize, the principal design goal of citizen digital identity should be self-determined citizen control over that identity, which implies secure citizen-controlled portability across an open digital identity infrastructure. This requires tight control over the digital security of that digital identity by the citizen themselves.

Citizen control also implies persistence of the digital identity. A natural person has existence for a period of time. The legal rights of that citizen extend beyond death, i.e. are perpetual. Comparable identity rights in the digital realm imply that digital identities must similarly be persistent, i.e., perpetual. The citizen must be able to maintain and prove control over their digital identifiers thoughout their lifetime. 

Realistically, no digital identity system is perfect, all have faults and will experience faults. Even in the physical world, one’s identity may be temporarily stolen. Expecting that faults can never occur is unreasonable. Therefore, a reasonable design constraint is that a citizen-controlled digital identity system be fault-tolerant, where the citizen can recover from a temporary loss of control over their identifiers. Given that the principal method of control over a digital identity relies on cryptographic digital signing key pairs, fault-tolerant means, at least, detection and recovery from compromise of the digital signing infrastructure.

### Control over Value (Exploitation)

Despite the conclusion that citizen control should be the principal property of digital identity systems, it has not been so historically. One reason is that the primary motivation for developing digital identity systems has been to unlock and capture value in the digital realm. The digital realm extends the reach and scope of each person's interaction space. Digital computing and digital communication enable highly efficient automated interactions, including business transactions. This efficiency unlocks significant value, motivating value capture by both private enterprise and governments. This has resulted in the current surveillance economy, with centralized, federated identity systems controlled by private and public organizations. This enables private enterprise and government to capture most of the value unlocked by digital interactions. This is inherently exploitive of individuals. This has resulted in a power imbalance in the digital realm. Citizens have little ability to benefit from the value they bring to digital interactions and transactions. They suffer from vendor lock-in.

Therefore, a crucial objective of citizen-sourced digital identity is to eliminate exploitation of citizens and restore a power balance between citizens and organizations with respect to control over the value resulting from citizen interaction. The primary balancing right is a duty of data loyalty. The value of the information generated during an interaction should be shared equally between the parties, based on the value each contributes.

In general, most individuals want to have high-value interactions. A good digital identity system should foster mutually beneficial, i.e., fairly balanced high-value interactions. 

One property of a high-value interaction is trust. If there is high trust, then the carrying cost of risk management in that interaction is reduced. This means that all parties to the interaction (be they individuals or organizations) must be reputable. Reputable parties bring higher trust and hence lower risk. But to be reputable, each party's participation must be securely attributed, and each party must be able to hold the other parties accountable for their actions. Accountability means recourse, which ultimately means legal and regulatory enforceability. 

Thus, the ultimate goal of exercising fair, balanced control (capture) of value in digital interactions requires accountability by each party to the other. Ultimate citizen-enforceable legal accountability is based on certain legal principles under contract law (civil and tort). A valid contract needs 1) an agreement, 2) an exchange of consideration, and 3) an intention to create legal relations. As long as both parties have no ambiguity regarding the 3 elements above, there is a valid contract. Thus, all parties to an accountable interaction must agree on their specific accountability.

What does this mean in terms of digital identity design? This means that accountability is an essential property of mutually beneficial (non-exploitative) interactions. In order to enforce accountability, the enforcing party must have a legal basis and hence legal standing for that enforcement.  Perpetual identity better supports accountability. If one can abandon an identity at will to avoid accountability, then that identity is not reputable.

### Privacy

The hard trade in digital identity system design is usually between authenticity and privacy. The PAC trilemma states that in a digital identity system, one may have two of the three properties, privacy, authenticity, and confidentiality, at the highest level, but not all three. In this trilemma, in the context of digital identities interacting, privacy means protection from third-party knowledge of who is a party to an interaction, authenticity means secure attribution by any party of the other party's participation in the interaction, and confidentiality means protection from knowledge by third parties of what information was exchanged in an interaction. 

Why is this a hard trade between privacy and authenticity? Principally, secure attribution requires provable knowledge of the *who* (parties) in an interaction. Such proof leaks correlatable knowledge about the parties, for no other reason than that the proof must be exchanged over a digital telecommunications network. Inherently, the trilemma recognizes that both privacy and confidentiality cannot be protected from third parties with solely technical means. For example, encryption can be used to securely prevent third parties from viewing information transmitted over the internet, but once the second party to that exchange decrypts that information, there is no technical way for the first party to prevent the second party from sharing that information with other parties. Continuing confidentiality protection requires legal, regulatory, or economic recourse. Likewise, when using the public internet to transmit information, routing data leaks information that is correlatable to the parties to that exchange. Once leaked, there is no technical means of preventing the other parties from sharing that correlatable information. Continuing privacy protection requires legal, regulatory, or economic recourse. In this context, *who* does not mean full legal identity but sufficient identification for the purposes of securely attributing that interaction enough to enable the interaction.  When a party is fully anonymous, the other parties have no legal recourse; as a result, the anonymous party has little or no accountability. When anonymous parties are involved, the type of interaction is limited to a low-value, low-trust one.

Therefore, because high-value, high-trust interactions require accountability, which implies legal recourse, the principal property of a digital identity can't be privacy first; it must be control first. The citizen must be able to exert legally enforceable control over the value exchanged in an interaction, and that cannot be done with an anonymous, ephemeral, non-reputable identity.

Let's look at privacy from another viewpoint. As mentioned above, control over value is about a mutually balanced, fair exchange as opposed to a one-sided, exploitative exchange. How is digital information about identity exploited? Typically, for most citizens, the most harmful exploitation is identity theft and impersonation fraud. This allows theft of assets, for example. The most common but least harmful by incidence is the sale of behavioral data used for marketing purposes. Finally, a very harmful but less common exploitation is via intimidation or persecution, often at the hands of governments or powerful organizations.

With secure authentication factors based on private cryptographic keys rather than shared secrets, privacy of personally identifying information is no longer a vector for identity-theft-based exploitation. Therefore, secure attribution eliminates impersonation fraud. This is a huge benefit to citizens. Secure attribution derives from the strongest citizen control over their digital identity. Strong control over identity provides a foundation for high-value, accountable interactions where the citizen can exert enforceable rights to balanced exchange. This changes the economics of surveillance for marketing purposes. Finally, protection from intimidation by governments is the hardest of all. One either gives up the ability ot have high-value transactions and protection from identity theft by becoming anonymous, or one is better able to hide from intimidation by becoming anonymous.
This is a harsh trade. The alternative, trade, is to give citizens civil rights and recourse against intimidation from organizations via digital identities. This changes the landscape of intimidation.  

What tips the trade away from anonymity is the increasing ability of super aggregators and Gen AIs to act as super correlators to defeat any and all technical attempts at digital anonymity. Every interaction leaks information. A super correlator has broad enough coverage that, over time, these leaks can be correlated enough to identify the individual and track their behavior. Thus, the only real protection is not technological but legal and regulatory. The citizen must have recourse to repress and punish the super-correlators to disincentivize them from engaging in the correlation. 

A useful analogy is this: hiding from exploitation amounts to ceding the battlefield of value capture to the super-correlators. One is left to, at best, find scraps of value in skirmishes on the outskirts of the value capture battlefield. Reputable, perpetual identity enables citizens to first stand their ground by exercising their civil rights, restore a balance of power, and then retake control of the value-capture battlefield.

## Tradespace of Proofing mechanisms

The two primary proofing mechanisms for the authentication of verifiable issuances are bare attached signatures and anchors in verifiable data structures. Bare attached signatures can be any signature-based proof. These include plain digital signatures as well as anonymous signatures (ZKPs) such as BBS+ signatures. A ZKP anonymous signature is not exempt from cryptoperiod limitations.

The principal limitation of bare attached signatures is their ephemerality. For most government-issued credentials or entitlements, the lifespan of the issuance exceeds by an order of magnitude the lifespan of the bare attached signature as proof of authenticity. This makes the ecosystem vulnerable to rampant impersonation fraud on the issuer. Government issuances compound this risk of fraud because the scale of issuance makes the ROI to attackers much greater due to the scale of usage. Thus, the system is much more susceptible to attack, which makes any side channel vulnerabilities much more likely to be successfully exploited. Thus, cryptoperiods must decrease in response to this heightened likelihood of successful exploit.

Therefore, the only secure way to use bare attached signatures is to have automated reissuance with very short expiration times. But practical automated reissuance with short expirations leads to managed wallets, which leads to less autonomy for the citizen. It quickly becomes counterproductive.

Alternatively, government issuances must be revocable on a case-by-case basis for legal and policy reasons. This requires a publicly available revocation registry that verifiers can check to determine revocation status. 

 Verifiable credential systems that ignore the ephemerality problem of bare attached signatures, including ZkP anonymous signatures, are fundamentally flawed from a security perspective. They should be censored, especially for government-issued credentials.

The main motivation for using anonymous (ZKP) bare attached signatures is for privacy. The principal advantages of an anonymous signature are 1) unlinkability, 2) threshold/range value proofs.  Unlinkability means that the proof mechanism does not provide any identifiers that can be used to link multiple presentations of that proof. With each presentation, the holder (issuee) of the credential or entitlement may generate a verifiable proof of authenticity that does not include an identifier linking a given presentation to any other presentation. This includes identifiers linkable by the Issuer. Typically, unlinkability is classified into two types: Vendor-to-Issuer and Vendor-to-Vendor. Vendor to Issuer means that a vendor who verifies the presentation is not given identifiers that, when shared with Issuer, enable the Issuer to identify the presentor (holder/issuee). Vendor-to-vendor means that when shared with another vendor who has also received a presentation from the same holder for the same credential, there are no mutual identifiers between the two presentations.  

It is important to recognize that unlinkability is not uncorrelatability. Any real-world exchange leaks information about the presenter. Any in-person exchange is identified due to ubiquitous facial ID from surveillance cameras. Any over-the-internet exchange leaks sufficient information to identify the presenter unless the presenter goes to great lengths to hide the internet metadata. For the vast majority of applications, those extreme measures would be impractical. Therefore, unlinkability is largely an exercise in privacy theater. This does not mean that it is unnecessary. Adoption of SEDI requires buy-in from a multitude of constituents, and some degree of theater is necessary to secure it. Thus, it is a fair requirement because it is needed to gain adoption, if for no other purpose.

The challenge is that when an issuance uses a revocation status registry, the registry itself provides a linkable identifier, undermining unlinkability. The only alternative for a revocation registry that does not defeat unlinkability is to use a cryptographic accumulator as the revocation registry. These have proven to be impractical for performance reasons. Therefore, the only viable alternatives defeat unlinkability. Nonetheless, a form of herd privacy that restores protection against vendor-to-issuer linkability may be achieved when the issuer agrees to update the registries only in bulk. But bulk updates do nothing to restore vendor-to-vendor unlinkability. So revocation requirements alone obviate one of the main reasons to use anonymous signatures as a proofing mechanism.

The other reason to use anonymous signatures as proofing mechanisms is that they provide threshold- or range-value proofs. The primary application in government issuances is proof of age, where such proof does not disclose the actual birthdate of the presenter (holder/issuee). However, a sparse Merkle tree can also provide such proofs. The tradeoffs are that the computational load for an anonymous signature range proof is quite long, but the storage requirement is quite small. Whereas the computational requirement for a sparse Merkle tree range proof is quite small, the storage is relatively large. In either case, age range proofs are practical. The sparse Merkle tree proof can be issued as a perpetually verifiable issuance. This means there is no unique advantage to using anonymous signatures with the harsh disadvantages of ephemerality.

The solution for unlinkability with perpetual issuances is called bulk issuance. In bulk issuance, the issuer issues a set of entitlements or credentials, each to a unique citizen-sourced identifier. Actually, each member of the bulk issuance set is itself a set of identifiers. These include SAIDs as well as AIDs. Thus, bulk issuance uses a *set of sets* of identifiers. The outer set is the bulk-issued set. The set of identifiers in each member is mutually exclusive (non-intersecting) among members of the bulk issuance. Therefore, a given presentation using the set of identifiers from one member of the bulk-issued set does not disclose any identifier that is shared with a presentation using the set of identifiers from a different bulk-issued member. 

The citizens' wallet manages the context in which the identifiers of each member of the bulk-issued set are used. The size (number of members) of the bulk-issued set depends on how many mutually exclusive contexts a user wants to maintain to protect against vendor-to-vendor linkability. Each member of a bulk-issued set has its own revocation registry, and the Issuer bulk-updates its revocation registries across all citizens, thereby providing herd privacy to protect against vendor-to-issuer linkability.  

Finally, vendor-to-issuer linkability is further repressed by citizen-enforceable regulation that disincentivizes collusion between vendors and issuers.

## Bulk Issuance and Duty-of-Data-Loyalty Enforcement

One salient advantage of using bulk issuance with perpetual identity and perpetually verifiable identifiers is that it may provide stronger enforceability of data loyalty regulations. Bulk issuance provides a mutually exclusive set of identifiers that can be used to better audit compliance with the duty of data loyalty provisions on a context-by-context basis. Indeed, given that unlinkability does little to protect against vendor-to-vendor and vendor-to-issuer correlation by data aggregators, bulk issuance's main advantage may be better user control over the contextualized enforcement of duty-of-data-loyalty and permitted cross-context correlation, rather than vendor-to-vendor unlinkability per se.

One mechanism that supports the duty of data loyalty is chain link confidentiality. Simply, chain-link confidentiality attaches strings to the downstream use of disclosed data. With ACDCs, these strings are cryptographically verifiable. A disclosure by a citizen that involves one or more SEDI ACDCs could come with terms and conditions associated with a duty of data loyalty to not only the proximate receiver (disclosee) of that disclosure but also any other receivers that receive that data from the proximate receiver and so forth. This imposes the liability and obligations of data loyalty on all downstream receivers. 

Of course, a given receiver could strip off any cryptographic artifacts and pretend that they received the disclosure via a mechanism not governed by data loyalty. One way the state can repress such behavior is to grant a safe harbor or limited liability from prosecution for duty-of-care data loyalty violations or civil lawsuits if they preserve the cryptographic artifacts for downstream receivers. These artifacts are primarily cryptographically derived identifiers that provide both tamper-evident and duplicity-evident (authenticity) protection of the flow of data. These identifiers are the same set used by each bulk-issued member for each ACDC in the disclosure set. Bulk issuance allows each citizen to control what identifiers are used in a given disclosure context. This creates effectively a reverse fingerprint of the disclosure that can be used to more specifically audit compliance with a duty of data loyalty.

A provision of liability limitation and safe harbor protection to data users incentivizes loyal behavior not merely by the proximate vendor that first receives data in an interaction with a citizen, but all the ultimate consumers of that data. Data consumers will want protection from unlimited liability arising from illegitimate data aggregation that does not serve the best interests of the citizens whose interactions are the source and subject of that aggregation. A proof of compliance may be granted to the ultimate consumer using chain-link confidentiality. Narrowing the contextual scope in which a given set of bulk-issued ACDC identifiers is used makes enforcement more precise. Because ACDCs use CESR for serialization, the citizen bulk-issued wallet can maintain a legally admissible audit log of its presentations. Such logs are commonly used as prima facia evidence in civil suits where the burden of proof is preponderance of evidence. Indeed, when those presentations are contextually partitioned by terms of use, the terms of use become bound to the specific provenance of a given bulk issued set of identifiers in a chain-link flow of data. This removes the consumer's plausible deniability regarding that data.








